notebook/2016-10-03-permutation-test/2016-10-03-permutation-test.md, before:

## Preparations


```
## Loading required package: RColorBrewer
```

```
## 
## Attaching package: 'latticeExtra'
```

```
## The following object is masked from 'package:ggplot2':
## 
##     layer
```

Load functions


```r
source("~/projects/monoallelic-brain/src/import-data.R")
source("~/projects/monoallelic-brain/src/fit-glms.R")
source("~/projects/monoallelic-brain/src/graphics.R")
```


```r
gene.ids <- unlist(read.csv("../../data/genes.regression.new", as.is = TRUE))
names(gene.ids) <- gene.ids
names(e.vars) <- e.vars
```


```r
E <- get.predictors() # default arguments
Y <- get.readcounts(gene.ids = gene.ids, count.thrs = 0)
```


```r
set.seed(1976)
perms <- data.frame(cbind(seq_len(nrow(E)), replicate(n.perm <- 1e4, sample.int(nrow(E)))))
names(perms) <- c("U", paste0("P", seq_len(n.perm)))
sel.models <- c("wnlm.Q", "logi.S")
sel.vars <- e.vars[c(1, 3, 5, 8)]
system.time(Betas <- aggregate.CI.permut2(perms = perms, gene.ids = gene.ids, e.vars = e.vars,
                                          sel.vars = sel.vars, sel.models = sel.models,
                                          E = E, Y = Y[gene.ids], skip.CI = TRUE))
```

```
##      user    system   elapsed 
## 18748.892     5.076 18754.811
```

## Results

The expressions above obtain the null distribution of regression coefficients for the selected predictor(s) Age, Gender, Dx, Ancestry.1 under the selected model(s) wnlm.Q, logi.S based on 10<sup>4</sup> permutations.  Each panel within a plot shows a red vertical zero line of the null hypothesis $\beta_j = 0$, the null distribution as probability density (solid blue line) based on the permutations, and the corresponding p-value (dotted blue line and number on the bottom).

### Under wnlm.Q


```r
beta0densityplot("Age", mtype = "wnlm.Q")
```

<img src="figure/beta-age-null-wnlm-Q-1.png" title="plot of chunk beta-age-null-wnlm-Q" alt="plot of chunk beta-age-null-wnlm-Q" width="700px" />

<img src="figure/beta-gender-null-wnlm-Q-1.png" title="plot of chunk beta-gender-null-wnlm-Q" alt="plot of chunk beta-gender-null-wnlm-Q" width="700px" />

<img src="figure/beta-dx-scz-wnlm-Q-1.png" title="plot of chunk beta-dx-scz-wnlm-Q" alt="plot of chunk beta-dx-scz-wnlm-Q" width="700px" />

<img src="figure/beta-dx-aff-wnlm-Q-1.png" title="plot of chunk beta-dx-aff-wnlm-Q" alt="plot of chunk beta-dx-aff-wnlm-Q" width="700px" />

<img src="figure/beta-ancestry-1-null-wnlm-Q-1.png" title="plot of chunk beta-ancestry-1-null-wnlm-Q" alt="plot of chunk beta-ancestry-1-null-wnlm-Q" width="700px" />

### Under logi.S

<img src="figure/beta-age-null-logi-S-1.png" title="plot of chunk beta-age-null-logi-S" alt="plot of chunk beta-age-null-logi-S" width="700px" />

<img src="figure/beta-gender-null-logi-S-1.png" title="plot of chunk beta-gender-null-logi-S" alt="plot of chunk beta-gender-null-logi-S" width="700px" />

<img src="figure/beta-dx-scz-logi-S-1.png" title="plot of chunk beta-dx-scz-logi-S" alt="plot of chunk beta-dx-scz-logi-S" width="700px" />

<img src="figure/beta-dx-aff-logi-S-1.png" title="plot of chunk beta-dx-aff-logi-S" alt="plot of chunk beta-dx-aff-logi-S" width="700px" />

<img src="figure/beta-ancestry-1-null-logi-S-1.png" title="plot of chunk beta-ancestry-1-null-logi-S" alt="plot of chunk beta-ancestry-1-null-logi-S" width="700px" />

## Comparison to p-values from t-distribution

The calculations and the plot below compare the p-values from the permutations to those based on the theoretical t-distribution of the statistic.  Comparing these results to those from model checking reveals that the two approaches to p-value calculation agree (fall near the gray diagonal on the plots) as long as the model fits the data well.  Otherwise the t-distribution based approach tends to produce much lower p-values and therefore exaggerate the significance that $\beta_j\neq 0$.


```r
source("2016-10-03-permutation-test.R")
```


```r
M <- do.all.fits(Z = Y[gene.ids], G = E, preds = e.vars, sel.models = sel.models)
cf <- unlist(sapply(e.vars, function(e.v) predictor2coefs(M[[c(1, 1)]], e.v)))
both.p.val <-
    do.call(rbind,
            lapply(sel.models, function(mtype)
                   do.call(rbind,
                           lapply(cf, function(coef)
                                  do.call(rbind,
                                          lapply(gene.ids,
                                                 function(g) get.both.p.vals(mtype = mtype, gene = g, coef = coef, M = M, B = Betas)))))))
```

<img src="figure/p-val-tdist-vs-perm-1.png" title="plot of chunk p-val-tdist-vs-perm" alt="plot of chunk p-val-tdist-vs-perm" width="700px" />

## Saving results

Writing long format results:


```r
write.csv(both.p.val, "../../results/regr-coefs.csv", row.names = FALSE)
```


```r
v.names <- c("Estimate", "p.val.t.dist", "p.val.perm")
mtypes <- c("wnlm.Q", "logi.S")
varying <- lapply(c(v.names), function(v) sapply(mtypes, function(m) paste0(v, ".", m)))
both.p.val.w <-
    reshape(both.p.val, direction = "wide", varying = varying, v.names = v.names,
            timevar = "Model", times = mtypes, idvar = c("Gene", "Coefficient"))
stars <- data.frame(sapply(varying.p <- unlist(varying[-1])[c(1, 3, 2, 4)],
                           function(v) annotate.signif(both.p.val.w[[v]])))
names(stars) <- paste0(varying.p, ".*")
both.p.val.w <- cbind(both.p.val.w[2:1], stars, both.p.val.w[-1 * 2:1])
write.csv(both.p.val.w, "../../results/regr-coefs-w.csv", row.names = FALSE)
```
```

Commit message:

Filtered for acceptable fit of logi.S

notebook/2016-10-03-permutation-test/2016-10-03-permutation-test.md, after:

## Preparations



Load functions


```r
source("~/projects/monoallelic-brain/src/import-data.R")
source("~/projects/monoallelic-brain/src/fit-glms.R")
source("~/projects/monoallelic-brain/src/graphics.R")
```


```r
gene.ids <- unlist(read.csv("../../data/genes.regression.new", as.is = TRUE))
names(gene.ids) <- gene.ids
names(e.vars) <- e.vars
```


```r
E <- get.predictors() # default arguments
Y <- get.readcounts(gene.ids = gene.ids, count.thrs = 0)
```


```r
set.seed(1976)
perms <- data.frame(cbind(seq_len(nrow(E)), replicate(n.perm <- 1e4, sample.int(nrow(E)))))
names(perms) <- c("U", paste0("P", seq_len(n.perm)))
sel.models <- c("wnlm.Q", "logi.S")
sel.vars <- e.vars[c(1, 3, 5, 8)]
system.time(Betas <- aggregate.CI.permut2(perms = perms, gene.ids = gene.ids, e.vars = e.vars,
                                          sel.vars = sel.vars, sel.models = sel.models,
                                          E = E, Y = Y[gene.ids], skip.CI = TRUE))
```

```
##      user    system   elapsed 
## 18748.892     5.076 18754.811
```

## Results

The expressions above obtain the null distribution of regression coefficients for the selected predictor(s) Age, Gender, Dx, Ancestry.1 under the selected model(s) wnlm.Q, logi.S based on 10<sup>4</sup> permutations.  Each panel within a plot shows a red vertical zero line of the null hypothesis $\beta_j = 0$, the null distribution as probability density (solid blue line) based on the permutations, and the corresponding p-value (dotted blue line and number on the bottom).

### Under wnlm.Q


```r
beta0densityplot("Age", mtype = "wnlm.Q")
```

<img src="figure/beta-age-null-wnlm-Q-1.png" title="plot of chunk beta-age-null-wnlm-Q" alt="plot of chunk beta-age-null-wnlm-Q" width="700px" />

<img src="figure/beta-gender-null-wnlm-Q-1.png" title="plot of chunk beta-gender-null-wnlm-Q" alt="plot of chunk beta-gender-null-wnlm-Q" width="700px" />

<img src="figure/beta-dx-scz-wnlm-Q-1.png" title="plot of chunk beta-dx-scz-wnlm-Q" alt="plot of chunk beta-dx-scz-wnlm-Q" width="700px" />

<img src="figure/beta-dx-aff-wnlm-Q-1.png" title="plot of chunk beta-dx-aff-wnlm-Q" alt="plot of chunk beta-dx-aff-wnlm-Q" width="700px" />

<img src="figure/beta-ancestry-1-null-wnlm-Q-1.png" title="plot of chunk beta-ancestry-1-null-wnlm-Q" alt="plot of chunk beta-ancestry-1-null-wnlm-Q" width="700px" />

### Under logi.S

<img src="figure/beta-age-null-logi-S-1.png" title="plot of chunk beta-age-null-logi-S" alt="plot of chunk beta-age-null-logi-S" width="700px" />

<img src="figure/beta-gender-null-logi-S-1.png" title="plot of chunk beta-gender-null-logi-S" alt="plot of chunk beta-gender-null-logi-S" width="700px" />

<img src="figure/beta-dx-scz-logi-S-1.png" title="plot of chunk beta-dx-scz-logi-S" alt="plot of chunk beta-dx-scz-logi-S" width="700px" />

<img src="figure/beta-dx-aff-logi-S-1.png" title="plot of chunk beta-dx-aff-logi-S" alt="plot of chunk beta-dx-aff-logi-S" width="700px" />

<img src="figure/beta-ancestry-1-null-logi-S-1.png" title="plot of chunk beta-ancestry-1-null-logi-S" alt="plot of chunk beta-ancestry-1-null-logi-S" width="700px" />

## Comparison to p-values from t-distribution

The calculations and the plot below compare the p-values from the permutations to those based on the theoretical t-distribution of the statistic.  Comparing these results to those from model checking reveals that the two approaches to p-value calculation agree (fall near the gray diagonal on the plots) as long as the model fits the data well.  Otherwise the t-distribution based approach tends to produce much lower p-values and therefore exaggerate the significance that $\beta_j\neq 0$.


```r
source("2016-10-03-permutation-test.R")
```


```r
M <- do.all.fits(Z = Y[gene.ids], G = E, preds = e.vars, sel.models = sel.models)
cf <- unlist(sapply(e.vars, function(e.v) predictor2coefs(M[[c(1, 1)]], e.v)))
both.p.val <-
    do.call(rbind,
            lapply(sel.models, function(mtype)
                   do.call(rbind,
                           lapply(cf, function(coef)
                                  do.call(rbind,
                                          lapply(gene.ids,
                                                 function(g) get.both.p.vals(mtype = mtype, gene = g, coef = coef, M = M, B = Betas)))))))
```

<img src="figure/p-val-tdist-vs-perm-1.png" title="plot of chunk p-val-tdist-vs-perm" alt="plot of chunk p-val-tdist-vs-perm" width="700px" />

### Filtering for poor fit

This filtering is based on earlier decisions on the goodness of fit of logi.S, which is stored in `results/model-checking.csv`.


```r
both.p.val <- cbind(both.p.val, read.csv("../../results/model-checking.csv", row.names = "gene")["logi.S.fit.OK"])
# set results to NA where logi.S fitted poorly
both.p.val[with(both.p.val, Model == "logi.S" & logi.S.fit.OK == FALSE), c("Estimate", "p.val.t.dist", "p.val.perm")] <- NA
```

Figure for manuscript showing p-values calculated from both approaches (theory: t-distribution, and permutation test) and under both models (wnlm.Q and, when the fit was OK, also logi.S)

<img src="figure/p-values-1.png" title="plot of chunk p-values" alt="plot of chunk p-values" width="700px" />

## Saving results

Writing long format results:


```r
write.csv(both.p.val, "../../results/regr-coefs.csv", row.names = FALSE)
```


```r
v.names <- c("Estimate", "p.val.t.dist", "p.val.perm")
mtypes <- c("wnlm.Q", "logi.S")
varying <- lapply(c(v.names), function(v) sapply(mtypes, function(m) paste0(v, ".", m)))
both.p.val.w <-
    reshape(both.p.val, direction = "wide", varying = varying, v.names = v.names,
            timevar = "Model", times = mtypes, idvar = c("Gene", "Coefficient"))
stars <- data.frame(sapply(varying.p <- unlist(varying[-1])[c(1, 3, 2, 4)],
                           function(v) annotate.signif(both.p.val.w[[v]])))
names(stars) <- paste0(varying.p, ".*")
both.p.val.w <- cbind(both.p.val.w[2:1], stars, both.p.val.w[-1 * 2:1])
write.csv(both.p.val.w, "../../results/regr-coefs-w.csv", row.names = FALSE)
```
